---
title: "Methodology"
meta_title: ""
description: "this is meta description"
draft: false
---


#### Coming soon 

We are currently in the process of compiling and preparing our results and findings for publication. As our work is ongoing, we appreciate your patience. Please check back soon for updates on our website.

The methodology of this research relies on using both quantitative and qualitative methods, and the questionnaire should be cross-checked and preceded by the pilot study. In order to have a broader picture and to make a relevant questionnaire, the qualitative research will be followed by the quantitative one. Due to limitations of quantitative and quantitative methods themselves, both methods will be used, and final results will be triangulated yielding a relevant conclusion on the preferred language and language usage in general, language attitudes and ideologies, both towards the Serbian and German language and culture. The suggested methodological frame is relevant for this type of research and based on recent methodologies for exploring language attitudes (Soukup 2013a; Kircher, Zipp 2022). The number of participants for the quantitative part of the research should not be less than 30 for interviews (semi-structured), and at least two focus groups with different representative participants should be added, having in mind their different socio-demographic background (8-10 participants in each focus group). Conducting the focus group research would be considered necessary in order to prevent giving socially desired answers, as that is less likely to happen in a group. 
The central part of this study would primarily be based on the quantitative method (questionnaire) mostly consisted of closed-type answers (5-degree semantic differential scale, yes/no questions), with a possibility to include some open-type questions if the results of the qualitative part induce that the topic requires them. All the results will be statistically processed by using the SPSS software according to socio-demographic variables of participants, such as: a) age, b) gender, c) level of education, d) whether participants are born and raised in Austria or not, e) immigrant generation (1st, 2nd or 3rd) and f) the decision to return to the homeland in the future. The quantitative part of the research would require not less than 300 participants in order to be relevant. The questionnaire would be made especially for the requirements of this research, but will be based on previous research of the Serbian language in the diaspora (eg. Pavlović 1990, 2012; Lukić-Krstanović 1992; Prelić 2008; Vuletić Đurić 2016; Savić 2019). Special attention would be paid to the statistically significant claims. The summarized final results could be a solid and very informative ground for further sociolinguistic research among this community, nowadays or in future, and, as all attitude studies, it may reveal and identify some contemporary social and (socio)linguistic issues, and possibly help the community in perspective by bringing the potential solutions.
